[BLOG] Under the hood: Designing resource-level access control in OpenSearch (#4032)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-12-14-Resource-Sharing-Technical-Deep-Dive.md

    * Removing access required role-mapping changes, not a change on the resource itself.

2. **Overly broad cluster privileges**

   Because access was controlled at the role level rather than the resource level, the following problems arose:

    * Roles needed powerful cluster permissions just so users could operate on their own resources.
    * It was difficult to grant *read-only access to this one detector* without granting broader capabilities.

3. **Distributed, plugin-specific metadata**

   Each plugin implemented its own access logic, resulting in:

    * Different JSON shapes for `owner` and `shared with`.
    * Different user experience patterns in OpenSearch Dashboards.
    * No central place to audit *access permissions and resource visibility*.

The new framework is designed to fix all of this.

---

## Design goals

When we started designing resource sharing, we focused on the following core principles:

1. **Resource-centric security**

   Authorization should be driven by who owns this resource and who it is shared with, not by backend-role overlaps that happen to exist.

2. **Centralized, reusable logic**:

>     * One framework inside the Security plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * One framework inside the Security plugin.
```

    sample_read_write:
      allowed_actions:
        - "cluster:admin/sample-resource-plugin/*"

    sample_full_access:
      allowed_actions:
        - "cluster:admin/sample-resource-plugin/*"
        - "cluster:admin/security/resource/share"
```

The Security plugin reads this file at startup and uses it to answer questions like “Does this user have `sample_read_write` on resource X?”

### Public, private, and restricted sharing patterns

The `share_with` structure lets you express the following common patterns.

**Private (default)**:

```json
{
  "share_with": {}
}
```

Visible only to the owner and superadmins.

**Public**:

```json
{
  "share_with": {
    "default": {
      "users": ["*"]
    }
  }
}
```

Any authenticated user can access the resource at the `default` access level.

**Restricted**:

```json
{
  "share_with": {
    "default": {
      "users": ["alice"],
      "roles": ["analytics_viewer"],
      "backend_roles": ["fraud-team"]
    }
  }
}
```

Only the listed principals can access this resource via that access level.

---

## Query-time evaluation: how results are filtered

There are two complementary pieces to runtime evaluation:

> 1. **Implicit filtering** for List and Search APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Implicit filtering** for List and Search APIs
```

}
```

### 2. Implement ResourceSharingExtension and register it

Create a class that implements `org.opensearch.security.spi.resources.ResourceSharingExtension`. This class informs the Security plugin about:

* The resource indexes you own.
* The resource types that are shareable.
* How those types map to your action groups.

Then register it using Java’s SPI mechanism:

```text
src/main/resources/META-INF/services/org.opensearch.security.spi.ResourceSharingExtension
```

The file must contain exactly one line with the fully qualified class name, for example:

```text
org.opensearch.sample.SampleResourceSharingExtension
```

### 3. Provide resource-action-groups.yml

Create a configuration file that defines your resource types and action groups:

```yaml
resource_types:
  sample-resource:
    sample_read_only:
      allowed_actions:
        - "cluster:admin/sample-resource-plugin/get"

    sample_read_write:
      allowed_actions:
        - "cluster:admin/sample-resource-plugin/*"

    sample_full_access:
      allowed_actions:
        - "cluster:admin/sample-resource-plugin/*"
        - "cluster:admin/security/resource/share"
```

> The `resource_types` keys must match the types you declare in `ResourceSharingExtension`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `resource_types` keys must match the types you declare in the `ResourceSharingExtension`.
```

```

* `enabled` — The feature flag, disabled by default.
* `protected_types` — List of resource types that should use resource-level auth.

From OpenSearch 3.4 onward, these can be updated dynamically:

```json
PUT _cluster/settings
{
  "persistent": {
    "plugins.security.experimental.resource_sharing.enabled": true,
    "plugins.security.experimental.resource_sharing.protected_types": [
      "anomaly-detector",
      "forecaster",
      "ml-model",
      "workflow",
      "workflow_state"
    ]
  }
}
```

This approach provides the following capabilities:

* Enabling the framework globally.
* Opting in specific resource types gradually.
* Rolling back by clearing the protected types list.

---

## Migration: From legacy metadata to shared resources

Existing clusters already have detectors, models, and other resources with embedded backend-role–based access control.

To avoid disrupting existing functionality, the Security plugin exposes a Migration API:

```http
POST /_plugins/_security/api/resources/migrate
```

The API requires the following parameters:

* `source_index` — The index in which the existing resources are located.

> * `username_path` — A JSON pointer to the owner field in each document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `username_path` — A JSON pointer to the owner field in each document
```

* `default_access_level` — A map from resource type to default action group.

**Example usage**:

```json
POST /_plugins/_security/api/resources/migrate
{
  "source_index": ".sample_resource",
  "username_path": "/owner",
  "backend_roles_path": "/backend_roles",
  "default_owner": "some_user",
  "default_access_level": {
    "sample-resource": "read_only",
    "sample-resource-group": "read-only-group"
  }
}
```

The migration flow looks like this:

```yaml
sequenceDiagram
    participant Admin as Cluster Admin
    participant MAPI as Migration API
    participant Core as Security Plugin (Migration)
    participant Src as Resource Index
    participant RSIDX as Sharing Index

    Admin->>MAPI: POST /resources/migrate {...}
    MAPI->>Core: Validate request & resolve sharing index
    Core->>Src: Scroll existing resource documents

    loop each document
        Core->>RSIDX: Upsert sharing doc\n{resource_id, created_by.user,\n share_with[default].backend_roles}
    end

    RSIDX-->>Core: Migration stats
    Core-->>Admin: 200 OK (summary + skipped IDs)
```

The response summary includes the following information:

* How many resources were migrated.

> * How many were skipped (for missing type or owner).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* How many were skipped (for missing type or owner)
```

* The resources that were assigned `default_owner`.

Only REST admins or superadmin users can run this API.

---

## Share, list, and manage resources in OpenSearch Dashboards

Once the framework is enabled and plugins are onboarded, OpenSearch Dashboards builds on top of the Security plugin REST APIs:

* `PUT /_plugins/_security/api/resource/share`
* `PATCH /_plugins/_security/api/resource/share`
* `POST /_plugins/_security/api/resource/share`
* `GET /_plugins/_security/api/resource/share`
* `GET /_plugins/_security/api/resource/list`
* `GET /_plugins/_security/api/resource/types`

These APIs enable OpenSearch Dashboards to provide comprehensive resource management capabilities:

* Sharing detectors with specific users and roles.

> * Displaying accessible resources and resharing permissions for the current user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Displaying accessible resources and resharing permissions for the current user
```

"This detector is owned by X, shared with Y, under access level Z."

For operators, this means:

* Clearer auditability of who can access what.
* Safer, more incremental rollouts using feature flags and protected types.
* A single, consistent sharing experience in OpenSearch Dashboards.

For plugin authors, it provides:

* Less boilerplate access-control code.
* A standard SPI to plug into.
* Automatic DLS-based filtering for list and search APIs.
* A migration path from legacy `filter_by_backend_roles` and plugin-specific metadata.

---

## Try resource sharing and share your feedback

Resource sharing and access control is available as an experimental feature in OpenSearch 3.3 and later. If you're developing a plugin and want to adopt resource sharing, start with performing these steps:

1. Implement `ResourceSharingExtension` and register your plugin as a resource plugin.
2. Define your resource action groups in `resource-action-groups.yml`.
3. Mark your resource indexes as system indexes and use a plugin client for access.
4. Use `isFeatureEnabledForType` and `verifyAccess` in your handlers.
5. Enable the feature for your resource type in a test cluster and iterate.

> After this, your plugin can inherit a complete, centralized sharing model with consistent behavior across the OpenSearch platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After this, your plugin can inherit a complete, centralized sharing model with consistent behavior across OpenSearch.
```

> Your input helps us improve the feature before it becomes generally available. Please share your experiences, questions, and suggestions on the [OpenSearch Forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your input helps to improve the feature before it becomes generally available, so feel free to share your experiences, questions, and suggestions on the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/). 
```
